docs/overview-analyzer.md, before:

# Notion Formula Analyzer (Rust)

This document is a code-backed overview of what is implemented today (parser/formatter/diagnostics/completion + a WASM bridge), with file paths for the source of truth. When behavior changes, update this doc (rewrite/remove outdated parts; don’t append-only).

## Repository layout (workspace)

Rust workspace members (from `Cargo.toml`):

- `analyzer/`: frontend engine (lex → parse → diagnostics → format; plus completion + a small semantic pass)
- `analyzer_wasm/`: `wasm-bindgen` bridge exporting `analyze(...)`, `complete(...)`, and `pos_to_line_col(...)` to JS/TS (UTF-16 boundary)
- `evaluator/`: currently a stub crate

Non-workspace directories:

- `examples/vite/`: Vite + CodeMirror demo consuming `analyzer_wasm`
- `docs/`: design notes / specs (this file lives here)

---

## `analyzer` module map

Entry points:

- `analyzer/src/lib.rs`:
  - `analyze(text: &str) -> Result<ParseOutput, Diagnostic>`
  - re-exports: `complete(text, cursor, ctx, config)`, `CompletionConfig`, `format_expr(...)`, `format_diagnostics(...)`, core token/span types

Core modules:

- `analyzer/src/lexer/mod.rs`: lexer producing `Token`s + lex diagnostics (strings, numbers, comments, operators)
- `analyzer/src/parser/mod.rs`: Pratt parser plumbing + binding power tables; builds `ParseOutput { expr, diagnostics, tokens }`
- `analyzer/src/parser/expr.rs`: expression grammar (primary/prefix/infix/ternary/call/member-call) + recovery
- `analyzer/src/ast.rs`: AST node types (preserves explicit grouping via `ExprKind::Group`)
- `analyzer/src/format.rs`: formatter for `Expr` using tokens/source for comment attachment; enforces width/indent rules; uses `TokenQuery`
- `analyzer/src/diagnostics.rs`: `Diagnostic` model + stable `format_diagnostics(...)` output (sorted by span/message)
- `analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`: minimal type checking driven by `Context { properties, functions }`
- `analyzer/src/completion/mod.rs`: byte-offset completion + signature help for editor integrations (pipeline/position/items/signature + ranking/matchers)
- `analyzer/src/source_map.rs`: byte offset → `(line,col)`
- `analyzer/src/token.rs`: token kinds, `Span` (byte offsets), trivia classification, `tokens_in_span(...)`
- `analyzer/src/tokenstream.rs`: `TokenCursor` (parser) + `TokenQuery` (span/token/trivia scanning)

---

## Tokens, spans, and token ranges

### Core span model (Rust)

- `Span { start: u32, end: u32 }` in `analyzer/src/token.rs`
- Represents **byte offsets**
- Half-open semantics: `[start, end)`

### Span → TokenRange

- `tokens_in_span(tokens, span: Span) -> TokenRange`
- Returns half-open token index range `[lo, hi)`
- Handles:
  - empty spans
  - stable “insertion point” behavior for empty spans
  - trivia tokens (comments/newlines) and EOF (which has an empty span)

---

## TokenQuery (canonical token neighbor API)

Location:

- `analyzer/src/tokenstream.rs`

`TokenQuery<'a>` centralizes **span → token range → trivia scanning**, replacing ad-hoc loops in formatter and utilities.

Key capabilities:

- `range_for_span(span)` → TokenRange
- `prev_nontrivia(idx)`
- `next_nontrivia(idx)`
- `first_in_range(range)`
- `last_in_range(range)`
- `leading_trivia_before(idx)`
- `trailing_trivia_until_newline_or_nontrivia(idx)`
- `bounds_usize(range)`

Design intent:

- Single authoritative place for trivia / neighbor scanning
- Reduce duplicated index arithmetic in formatter and comment logic
- Token index semantics are always half-open `[lo, hi)`

---

## Implemented syntax (what the lexer/parser accept)

Literals and identifiers:

- numbers: integer digits only (`analyzer/src/lexer/mod.rs`)
- strings: double-quoted, no escapes (“v1” behavior)
- identifiers: ASCII letters/`_` plus any non-ASCII codepoint

Expression forms (AST):

- unary: `!expr`, `-expr`
- binary: `< <= == != >= > && || + - * / % ^`
- ternary: `cond ? then : otherwise`
- grouping: `(expr)` preserved as `ExprKind::Group`
- calls: `ident(arg1, arg2, ...)`
- member-call: `receiver.method(arg1, ...)`
  (member access without `(...)` is rejected)

Known gaps:

- boolean literals (`true` / `false`) lex as identifiers (the lexer does not emit `LitKind::Bool` today)
- `not` is suggested by completion but is not a lexer/parser operator today
- completion operator list does not include every parsed operator

---

## Builtins + sugar (where they live)

Semantic analysis (`analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`):

- `Context` is `{ properties: Vec<Property>, functions: Vec<FunctionSig> }`.
- Builtin function signatures are defined in `builtins_functions()` (this list is the source of truth and is larger than a couple of functions).
- `prop("Name")` is **special-cased** in the semantic analyzer (it is not a `FunctionSig`):
  - expects exactly 1 argument
  - argument must be a string literal
  - property name must exist in `Context.properties` (else a diagnostic is emitted)
- `if(condition, then, else)` is special-cased for type checking:
  - expects exactly 3 arguments
  - `condition` must be boolean (if known)
  - result type is a join of `then`/`else` (currently `Unknown` if they differ)
- Postfix sugar typing:
  - `condition.if(then, else)` is treated like `if(condition, then, else)` **for typing only** when `if` exists in `Context.functions`.

Completion (`analyzer/src/completion/mod.rs`, ranking/matching in `analyzer/src/completion/rank.rs` + `analyzer/src/completion/matchers.rs`):

- Public entrypoint: `completion::complete(text: &str, cursor: usize, ctx: Option<&semantic::Context>, config: CompletionConfig) -> CompletionOutput`.
- Cursor and `replace` spans are **byte offsets** in the core analyzer.
- Completion item kinds: `Function`, `Builtin`, `Property`, `Operator`.
- Builtin completion items include `true`, `false`, `not` (note: today these still lex/parse as identifiers; `not` is not an operator).
- Postfix completion is driven by a single builtin-derived allowlist (`postfix_capable_builtin_names()` in `analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`), defined as builtins with **more than one parameter** (so there is at least one non-receiver argument):
  - after an atom: `.if()` is offered (inserts the leading `.`)
  - after `.` with a receiver atom: `.if` is offered and inserts `if()` (the `.` is already in the source)
- Property completion items insert `prop("Name")` and can be disabled via `Property.disabled_reason` (disabled items have no `primary_edit`/cursor).
- At an identifier boundary (cursor at the end of an identifier token), the analyzer treats completion as “prefix editing” only if the prefix can be extended by something in-scope:
  - builtins `true`/`false`/`not` via case-insensitive prefix match
  - context functions/properties via case-insensitive prefix match (excluding exact matches)
- When `CompletionOutput.replace` is non-empty, the analyzer derives a “query” from the source substring covered by the replace span. If the substring contains any non-identifier characters (identifier-like = ASCII alnum + `_` + whitespace), no fuzzy ranking is applied and `preferred_indices` is `[]`. Otherwise the query is normalized (lowercased; whitespace/underscores removed); if the normalized query is empty, fuzzy ranking is also skipped.
- With a non-empty query, completion ranking applies to `CompletionKind::Function` and `CompletionKind::Property` labels (the identifiers users type). In member-access (after-dot) prefix completion, postfix-method items are **filtered** to only those matching the query and then ranked using the same normalization/matching (matching is computed on the label **without** the leading `.`). Query and label are normalized by lowercasing and removing `_`. Items are ranked by:
  1) exact match (`label_norm == query_norm`)
  2) substring contains (`label_norm` contains `query_norm`)
  3) fuzzy subsequence match (existing subsequence scoring)
  Within exact/contains, shorter normalized labels rank first (and for contains, earlier substring occurrence breaks ties); fuzzy ties use the subsequence score; all remaining ties are deterministic by original index. Other completion kinds are left in original relative order after matched items.
- When type ranking is applied (cursor at expr-start inside a call with a known expected argument type), items are grouped into contiguous runs by `CompletionKind` *before* query ranking. When query ranking applies, it may reorder across kinds.
- `CompletionOutput.preferred_indices` is the analyzer-provided “smart picks” for UI default selection / recommendation: indices of up to `preferred_limit` enabled items that matched the query (in the already-ranked order). `preferred_limit` defaults to `5`, is configurable via `context_json.completion.preferred_limit`, and `0` disables preferred computation (always returns `[]`).
- Signature help is computed only when the cursor is inside a call and uses `Context.functions`.
  - For postfix calls `<receiver>.<callee>(...)` where `<callee>` is a postfix-capable builtin, signature help models the receiver separately:
    - `receiver`: formatted first parameter (`<receiver_param>`)
    - `label`: `<callee>(<remaining_params>[, ...]) -> <ret>`
    - `params`: the remaining parameters only (`sig.params[1..]`)
    - `active_param` indexes into `params` only (excluding receiver).

---

## WASM boundary invariants (`analyzer_wasm`)

Exported functions (`analyzer_wasm/src/lib.rs`):

- `analyze(source: String, context_json: String) -> Result<JsValue, JsValue>`
- `complete(source: String, cursor_utf16: usize, context_json: String) -> Result<JsValue, JsValue>`
- `pos_to_line_col(source: String, pos_utf16: u32) -> JsValue`

`context_json` invariants (enforced by `Converter::parse_context(...)` and covered by WASM tests):

- must be non-empty and valid JSON
- unknown top-level fields are rejected (`deny_unknown_fields`)
- schema today is: `{ "properties": Property[], "completion"?: { "preferred_limit"?: number } }`
- `Context.functions` is populated from Rust `builtins_functions()` (JS cannot supply functions today)

---

### Encoding boundary design

**Core analyzer (Rust):**

- All spans and cursor positions are **byte offsets**

**JS / WASM boundary:**

- All exposed spans use **UTF-16 code unit offsets**
- Conversion occurs only in the WASM layer

DTO types (`analyzer_wasm/src/dto/v1.rs`):

```ts
Span { start: u32, end: u32 } // UTF-16 code units, half-open [start, end)
SpanView { range: Span }
LineColView { line: u32, col: u32 }
TextEditView { range: Span, new_text: string }
CompletionOutputView { items: CompletionItemView[], replace: Span, signature_help: SignatureHelpView | null, preferred_indices: number[] }
```

Byte ↔ UTF-16 conversion lives in WASM

Files:

- `analyzer_wasm/src/offsets.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/span.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/converter.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/text_edit.rs`

Helpers:

- `utf16_offset_to_byte(source, utf16_pos)`
- `byte_offset_to_utf16_offset(source, byte_pos)`
- `byte_span_to_utf16_span(source, span)`

JS never deals with byte offsets.
Rust core never deals with UTF-16 offsets.

---

### Line / Column handling (now derived, not stored)

- `DTO SpanView` no longer stores line or col
- `Line/column` is computed lazily via: `pos_to_line_col(source, pos_utf16) -> LineColView` (1-based)
- `pos_to_line_col` takes a **UTF-16** offset at the JS boundary and maps through byte offsets internally.

Text edits / cursor rebasing:

- Analyzer `TextEdit` ranges are **byte offsets**.
- WASM DTO `TextEditView` ranges are **UTF-16**.
- `analyzer_wasm/src/text_edit.rs` applies byte edits in **descending start offset order** and can rebase a byte cursor through edits.
- The completion DTO’s optional `cursor` is expressed in **UTF-16 in the updated document**.

---

Tests (what exists and where)

Rust unit tests (analyzer/src/tests/)

Coverage:

- lexer
- parser
- span invariants
- token-in-span
- TokenQuery behavior
- formatter
- completion DSL
- semantic checks

---

Rust golden tests

Runners:

- `analyzer/tests/format_golden.rs`
- `analyzer/tests/diagnostics_golden.rs`

Fixtures:

- `analyzer/tests/format/*.formula → *.snap`
- `analyzer/tests/diagnostics/*.formula → *.snap`

Snapshots updated via:

```bash
BLESS=1 cargo test -p analyzer
```

WASM tests

- analyzer_wasm/tests/analyze.rs
- Validates:
  - UTF-16 span correctness
  - token span integrity
  - diagnostics mapping
  - `context_json` validation rules (non-empty JSON; unknown fields rejected)

Vite demo tests (TypeScript)

- Unit tests: examples/vite/tests/unit/ (Vitest)
- E2E tests: examples/vite/tests/e2e/ (Playwright)
- Note: some unit tests import the generated WASM glue from `examples/vite/src/pkg/`.
  Ensure `pnpm -C examples/vite wasm:build` has been run at least once (or otherwise provide
  `examples/vite/src/pkg/analyzer_wasm.js`) before running `pnpm -C examples/vite test`.

Regression coverage:

- token highlighting
- diagnostics propagation
- chip spans
- UI behavior
- editor undo/redo keybindings
- editor height cap + internal scrolling
- completion cursor placement (including UTF-16 text)
- completion list scroll-into-view behavior

### Vite demo completion UI

The Vite demo renders completions returned by the WASM `complete(...)` export entirely on the TypeScript side.

Primary files:

- `examples/vite/src/analyzer/wasm_client.ts`: calls `wasm.complete(...)` via `completeSource(...)`
- `examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`: renders the completion panel and applies selected completions

Rendering behavior:

- Completions are displayed as a list under the “Suggestions” panel.
- Function completions are grouped by `category` (UI-owned grouping; no WASM changes).
- Non-function completions are grouped by consecutive `kind` changes (UI-owned grouping).
- Selection and navigation operate over a `completionRows` model (headers + items):
  - Headers are not selectable.
  - Arrow key navigation skips over header rows.
- Applying a completion maps the selected row back to the underlying `CompletionItem` index.

Styling:

- Group headers use `.completion-group-header` in `examples/vite/src/style.css`.
- The formula editor height is constrained to ~4 visible lines via `.editor .cm-editor .cm-scroller`,
  and the scroller uses `overflow-y: auto` so longer inputs scroll instead of growing the layout.

Editor keybindings / history:

- The CodeMirror editor enables history (undo/redo) with `history()` and `historyKeymap` from
  `@codemirror/commands` (wired in `examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`).

Cursor placement invariants

- Analyzer core (`analyzer/`) computes completion cursors as **byte offsets**.
- The analyzer’s optional `CompletionItem.cursor` is intended to represent the desired cursor position
  **in the updated document after applying the primary edit** (e.g., `if()` => inside the `(`).
- The WASM bridge (`analyzer_wasm/`) converts completion edit ranges and cursor values to **UTF-16**
  for JS/editor usage, and accounts for shifts from `additional_edits` that occur before the primary edit.
- The Vite demo uses `item.cursor` when present; otherwise it falls back to `primary_edit` end plus any
  shifts from additional edits before the primary edit (`examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`).

Playwright host configuration

- The Playwright suite in `examples/vite/` boots Vite via the `webServer` setting in
  `examples/vite/playwright.config.ts`.
- Host/port can be overridden with:
  - `PW_HOST` (defaults to `127.0.0.1`)
  - `PW_PORT` (defaults to `5173`)

Current architectural invariants

- Analyzer core uses byte offsets only
- JS/WASM boundary uses UTF-16 offsets only
- Span semantics are half-open [start, end) everywhere
- TokenQuery is the canonical trivia/token neighbor API
- Token ranges derive from spans via tokens_in_span
- Line/column is derived lazily, not stored
- Encoding conversion lives only in WASM

Commit message:

Add supports for generic inference

docs/overview-analyzer.md, after:

# Notion Formula Analyzer (Rust)

This document is a code-backed overview of what is implemented today (parser/formatter/diagnostics/completion + a WASM bridge), with file paths for the source of truth. When behavior changes, update this doc (rewrite/remove outdated parts; don’t append-only).

## Repository layout (workspace)

Rust workspace members (from `Cargo.toml`):

- `analyzer/`: frontend engine (lex → parse → diagnostics → format; plus completion + a small semantic pass)
- `analyzer_wasm/`: `wasm-bindgen` bridge exporting `analyze(...)`, `complete(...)`, and `pos_to_line_col(...)` to JS/TS (UTF-16 boundary)
- `evaluator/`: currently a stub crate

Non-workspace directories:

- `examples/vite/`: Vite + CodeMirror demo consuming `analyzer_wasm`
- `docs/`: design notes / specs (this file lives here)

---

## `analyzer` module map

Entry points:

- `analyzer/src/lib.rs`:
  - `analyze(text: &str) -> Result<ParseOutput, Diagnostic>`
  - re-exports: `complete(text, cursor, ctx, config)`, `CompletionConfig`, `format_expr(...)`, `format_diagnostics(...)`, core token/span types

Core modules:

- `analyzer/src/lexer/mod.rs`: lexer producing `Token`s + lex diagnostics (strings, numbers, comments, operators)
- `analyzer/src/parser/mod.rs`: Pratt parser plumbing + binding power tables; builds `ParseOutput { expr, diagnostics, tokens }`
- `analyzer/src/parser/expr.rs`: expression grammar (primary/prefix/infix/ternary/call/member-call) + recovery
- `analyzer/src/ast.rs`: AST node types (preserves explicit grouping via `ExprKind::Group`)
- `analyzer/src/format.rs`: formatter for `Expr` using tokens/source for comment attachment; enforces width/indent rules; uses `TokenQuery`
- `analyzer/src/diagnostics.rs`: `Diagnostic` model + stable `format_diagnostics(...)` output (sorted by span/message)
- `analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`: minimal type checking driven by `Context { properties, functions }`
- `analyzer/src/completion/mod.rs`: byte-offset completion + signature help for editor integrations (pipeline/position/items/signature + ranking/matchers)
- `analyzer/src/source_map.rs`: byte offset → `(line,col)`
- `analyzer/src/token.rs`: token kinds, `Span` (byte offsets), trivia classification, `tokens_in_span(...)`
- `analyzer/src/tokenstream.rs`: `TokenCursor` (parser) + `TokenQuery` (span/token/trivia scanning)

---

## Tokens, spans, and token ranges

### Core span model (Rust)

- `Span { start: u32, end: u32 }` in `analyzer/src/token.rs`
- Represents **byte offsets**
- Half-open semantics: `[start, end)`

### Span → TokenRange

- `tokens_in_span(tokens, span: Span) -> TokenRange`
- Returns half-open token index range `[lo, hi)`
- Handles:
  - empty spans
  - stable “insertion point” behavior for empty spans
  - trivia tokens (comments/newlines) and EOF (which has an empty span)

---

## TokenQuery (canonical token neighbor API)

Location:

- `analyzer/src/tokenstream.rs`

`TokenQuery<'a>` centralizes **span → token range → trivia scanning**, replacing ad-hoc loops in formatter and utilities.

Key capabilities:

- `range_for_span(span)` → TokenRange
- `prev_nontrivia(idx)`
- `next_nontrivia(idx)`
- `first_in_range(range)`
- `last_in_range(range)`
- `leading_trivia_before(idx)`
- `trailing_trivia_until_newline_or_nontrivia(idx)`
- `bounds_usize(range)`

Design intent:

- Single authoritative place for trivia / neighbor scanning
- Reduce duplicated index arithmetic in formatter and comment logic
- Token index semantics are always half-open `[lo, hi)`

---

## Implemented syntax (what the lexer/parser accept)

Literals and identifiers:

- numbers: integer digits only (`analyzer/src/lexer/mod.rs`)
- strings: double-quoted, no escapes (“v1” behavior)
- identifiers: ASCII letters/`_` plus any non-ASCII codepoint

Expression forms (AST):

- unary: `!expr`, `-expr`
- binary: `< <= == != >= > && || + - * / % ^`
- ternary: `cond ? then : otherwise`
- grouping: `(expr)` preserved as `ExprKind::Group`
- calls: `ident(arg1, arg2, ...)`
- member-call: `receiver.method(arg1, ...)`
  (member access without `(...)` is rejected)

Known gaps:

- boolean literals (`true` / `false`) lex as identifiers (the lexer does not emit `LitKind::Bool` today)
- `not` is suggested by completion but is not a lexer/parser operator today
- completion operator list does not include every parsed operator

---

## Builtins + sugar (where they live)

Semantic analysis (`analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`):

- `Context` is `{ properties: Vec<Property>, functions: Vec<FunctionSig> }`.
- Builtin function signatures are defined in `builtins_functions()`.
- `FunctionSig` now models parameters via `layout: ParamLayout`:
  - `ParamLayout::Flat(Vec<ParamSig>)` for simple parameter lists (including legacy “last param is variadic” shapes)
- `ParamLayout::RepeatGroup { head, repeat, tail }` for repeating bindings like `(a, b, a, b, ..., tail)`
- `ParamSig.name` is required (`String`) and `FunctionSig` can declare `generics: Vec<GenericParam>`.
- Semantic analysis is inference-first:
  - `infer_expr_with_map(expr, ctx, &mut TypeMap)` computes a `TypeMap` of `ExprId`/`NodeId -> Ty`.
  - `analyze_expr` returns the inferred root type and emits diagnostics by comparing inferred argument types to builtin signatures (arity + expected types).
- `prop("Name")` is **special-cased** in the semantic analyzer (it is not a `FunctionSig`):
  - expects exactly 1 argument
  - argument must be a string literal
  - property name must exist in `Context.properties` (else a diagnostic is emitted)
- Generic inference is driven by `FunctionSig.generics` + `Ty::Generic` (see `analyzer/src/semantic/infer.rs`):
  - `if<T: Plain>(condition: boolean, then: T, else: T) -> T`
    - `Plain` generics accumulate permissively (conflicts form a union).
  - `ifs<T: Variant>([condition: boolean, value: T]..., default: T) -> T`
    - `Variant` generics union-accumulate across every binding and **skip** `Unknown`.
- Postfix sugar typing/inference:
  - For postfix-capable builtins, `receiver.fn(arg1, ...)` is treated like `fn(receiver, arg1, ...)` (flat layouts only).

Completion (`analyzer/src/completion/mod.rs`, ranking/matching in `analyzer/src/completion/rank.rs` + `analyzer/src/completion/matchers.rs`):

- Public entrypoint: `completion::complete(text: &str, cursor: usize, ctx: Option<&semantic::Context>, config: CompletionConfig) -> CompletionOutput`.
- Cursor and `replace` spans are **byte offsets** in the core analyzer.
- Completion item kinds: `Function`, `Builtin`, `Property`, `Operator`.
- Builtin completion items include `true`, `false`, `not` (note: today these still lex/parse as identifiers; `not` is not an operator).
- Postfix completion is driven by a single builtin-derived allowlist (`postfix_capable_builtin_names()` in `analyzer/src/semantic/mod.rs`), defined as builtins with a **flat parameter list** that has more than one parameter (so there is at least one non-receiver argument):
  - after an atom: `.if()` is offered (inserts the leading `.`)
  - after `.` with a receiver atom: `.if` is offered and inserts `if()` (the `.` is already in the source)
- Property completion items insert `prop("Name")` and can be disabled via `Property.disabled_reason` (disabled items have no `primary_edit`/cursor).
- At an identifier boundary (cursor at the end of an identifier token), the analyzer treats completion as “prefix editing” only if the prefix can be extended by something in-scope:
  - builtins `true`/`false`/`not` via case-insensitive prefix match
  - context functions/properties via case-insensitive prefix match (excluding exact matches)
- When `CompletionOutput.replace` is non-empty, the analyzer derives a “query” from the source substring covered by the replace span. If the substring contains any non-identifier characters (identifier-like = ASCII alnum + `_` + whitespace), no fuzzy ranking is applied and `preferred_indices` is `[]`. Otherwise the query is normalized (lowercased; whitespace/underscores removed); if the normalized query is empty, fuzzy ranking is also skipped.
- With a non-empty query, completion ranking applies to `CompletionKind::Function` and `CompletionKind::Property` labels (the identifiers users type). In member-access (after-dot) prefix completion, postfix-method items are **filtered** to only those matching the query and then ranked using the same normalization/matching (matching is computed on the label **without** the leading `.`). Query and label are normalized by lowercasing and removing `_`. Items are ranked by:
  1) exact match (`label_norm == query_norm`)
  2) substring contains (`label_norm` contains `query_norm`)
  3) fuzzy subsequence match (existing subsequence scoring)
  Within exact/contains, shorter normalized labels rank first (and for contains, earlier substring occurrence breaks ties); fuzzy ties use the subsequence score; all remaining ties are deterministic by original index. Other completion kinds are left in original relative order after matched items.
- When type ranking is applied (cursor at expr-start inside a call with a known expected argument type), items are grouped into contiguous runs by `CompletionKind` *before* query ranking. When query ranking applies, it may reorder across kinds.
- `CompletionOutput.preferred_indices` is the analyzer-provided “smart picks” for UI default selection / recommendation: indices of up to `preferred_limit` enabled items that matched the query (in the already-ranked order). `preferred_limit` defaults to `5`, is configurable via `context_json.completion.preferred_limit`, and `0` disables preferred computation (always returns `[]`).
- Signature help is computed only when the cursor is inside a call and uses `Context.functions`.
  - Signature help displays `FunctionSig` types as-is (including `T0`/`T1` for generics); it does not re-run semantic inference to “hint” call-site types.
  - For postfix calls `<receiver>.<callee>(...)` where `<callee>` is a postfix-capable builtin, signature help models the receiver separately:
    - `receiver`: formatted first parameter (`<receiver_param>`)
    - `label`: `<callee>(<remaining_params>[, ...]) -> <ret>`
    - `params`: the remaining parameters only (for flat layouts, this is the parameter list excluding the first “receiver” param)
    - `active_param` indexes into `params` only (excluding receiver).

---

## WASM boundary invariants (`analyzer_wasm`)

Exported functions (`analyzer_wasm/src/lib.rs`):

- `analyze(source: String, context_json: String) -> Result<JsValue, JsValue>`
- `complete(source: String, cursor_utf16: usize, context_json: String) -> Result<JsValue, JsValue>`
- `pos_to_line_col(source: String, pos_utf16: u32) -> JsValue`

`context_json` invariants (enforced by `Converter::parse_context(...)` and covered by WASM tests):

- must be non-empty and valid JSON
- unknown top-level fields are rejected (`deny_unknown_fields`)
- schema today is: `{ "properties": Property[], "completion"?: { "preferred_limit"?: number } }`
- `Context.functions` is populated from Rust `builtins_functions()` (JS cannot supply functions today)

---

### Encoding boundary design

**Core analyzer (Rust):**

- All spans and cursor positions are **byte offsets**

**JS / WASM boundary:**

- All exposed spans use **UTF-16 code unit offsets**
- Conversion occurs only in the WASM layer

DTO types (`analyzer_wasm/src/dto/v1.rs`):

```ts
Span { start: u32, end: u32 } // UTF-16 code units, half-open [start, end)
SpanView { range: Span }
LineColView { line: u32, col: u32 }
TextEditView { range: Span, new_text: string }
CompletionOutputView { items: CompletionItemView[], replace: Span, signature_help: SignatureHelpView | null, preferred_indices: number[] }
```

Byte ↔ UTF-16 conversion lives in WASM

Files:

- `analyzer_wasm/src/offsets.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/span.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/converter.rs`
- `analyzer_wasm/src/text_edit.rs`

Helpers:

- `utf16_offset_to_byte(source, utf16_pos)`
- `byte_offset_to_utf16_offset(source, byte_pos)`
- `byte_span_to_utf16_span(source, span)`

JS never deals with byte offsets.
Rust core never deals with UTF-16 offsets.

---

### Line / Column handling (now derived, not stored)

- `DTO SpanView` no longer stores line or col
- `Line/column` is computed lazily via: `pos_to_line_col(source, pos_utf16) -> LineColView` (1-based)
- `pos_to_line_col` takes a **UTF-16** offset at the JS boundary and maps through byte offsets internally.

Text edits / cursor rebasing:

- Analyzer `TextEdit` ranges are **byte offsets**.
- WASM DTO `TextEditView` ranges are **UTF-16**.
- `analyzer_wasm/src/text_edit.rs` applies byte edits in **descending start offset order** and can rebase a byte cursor through edits.
- The completion DTO’s optional `cursor` is expressed in **UTF-16 in the updated document**.

---

Tests (what exists and where)

Rust unit tests (analyzer/src/tests/)

Coverage:

- lexer
- parser
- span invariants
- token-in-span
- TokenQuery behavior
- formatter
- completion DSL
- semantic checks

---

Rust golden tests

Runners:

- `analyzer/tests/format_golden.rs`
- `analyzer/tests/diagnostics_golden.rs`

Fixtures:

- `analyzer/tests/format/*.formula → *.snap`
- `analyzer/tests/diagnostics/*.formula → *.snap`

Snapshots updated via:

```bash
BLESS=1 cargo test -p analyzer
```

WASM tests

- analyzer_wasm/tests/analyze.rs
- Validates:
  - UTF-16 span correctness
  - token span integrity
  - diagnostics mapping
  - `context_json` validation rules (non-empty JSON; unknown fields rejected)

Vite demo tests (TypeScript)

- Unit tests: examples/vite/tests/unit/ (Vitest)
- E2E tests: examples/vite/tests/e2e/ (Playwright)
- Note: some unit tests import the generated WASM glue from `examples/vite/src/pkg/`.
  Ensure `pnpm -C examples/vite wasm:build` has been run at least once (or otherwise provide
  `examples/vite/src/pkg/analyzer_wasm.js`) before running `pnpm -C examples/vite test`.

Regression coverage:

- token highlighting
- diagnostics propagation
- chip spans
- UI behavior
- editor undo/redo keybindings
- editor height cap + internal scrolling
- completion cursor placement (including UTF-16 text)
- completion list scroll-into-view behavior

### Vite demo completion UI

The Vite demo renders completions returned by the WASM `complete(...)` export entirely on the TypeScript side.

Primary files:

- `examples/vite/src/analyzer/wasm_client.ts`: calls `wasm.complete(...)` via `completeSource(...)`
- `examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`: renders the completion panel and applies selected completions

Rendering behavior:

- Completions are displayed as a list under the “Suggestions” panel.
- Function completions are grouped by `category` (UI-owned grouping; no WASM changes).
- Non-function completions are grouped by consecutive `kind` changes (UI-owned grouping).
- Selection and navigation operate over a `completionRows` model (headers + items):
  - Headers are not selectable.
  - Arrow key navigation skips over header rows.
- Applying a completion maps the selected row back to the underlying `CompletionItem` index.

Styling:

- Group headers use `.completion-group-header` in `examples/vite/src/style.css`.
- The formula editor height is constrained to ~4 visible lines via `.editor .cm-editor .cm-scroller`,
  and the scroller uses `overflow-y: auto` so longer inputs scroll instead of growing the layout.

Editor keybindings / history:

- The CodeMirror editor enables history (undo/redo) with `history()` and `historyKeymap` from
  `@codemirror/commands` (wired in `examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`).

Cursor placement invariants

- Analyzer core (`analyzer/`) computes completion cursors as **byte offsets**.
- The analyzer’s optional `CompletionItem.cursor` is intended to represent the desired cursor position
  **in the updated document after applying the primary edit** (e.g., `if()` => inside the `(`).
- The WASM bridge (`analyzer_wasm/`) converts completion edit ranges and cursor values to **UTF-16**
  for JS/editor usage, and accounts for shifts from `additional_edits` that occur before the primary edit.
- The Vite demo uses `item.cursor` when present; otherwise it falls back to `primary_edit` end plus any
  shifts from additional edits before the primary edit (`examples/vite/src/ui/formula_panel_view.ts`).

Playwright host configuration

- The Playwright suite in `examples/vite/` boots Vite via the `webServer` setting in
  `examples/vite/playwright.config.ts`.
- Host/port can be overridden with:
  - `PW_HOST` (defaults to `127.0.0.1`)
  - `PW_PORT` (defaults to `5173`)

Current architectural invariants

- Analyzer core uses byte offsets only
- JS/WASM boundary uses UTF-16 offsets only
- Span semantics are half-open [start, end) everywhere
- TokenQuery is the canonical trivia/token neighbor API
- Token ranges derive from spans via tokens_in_span
- Line/column is derived lazily, not stored
- Encoding conversion lives only in WASM
